Welcome to JW Broadcasting.
As Jehovah's Witnesses, we consider the Bible a marvelous gift
from our Heavenly Father.
In the next hour, we'll deepen our appreciation for this gift.
We'll learn how Jehovah expresses his love through it
and how countless individuals preserved its message.
We'll learn how the Bible was written down
long before modern printing techniques were invented.
Knowing God's name is a privilege.
A humble man felt similarly,
which moved him to produce the first English Bible
to consistently use Jehovah's name.
And in our latest installment of Truth Transforms Lives,
we'll learn how Bible promises led a deaf man
who was an orphan to find his Heavenly Father
and spiritual family.
This is JW Broadcasting.
Imagine you just learned that you had received
an amazing inheritance,
something very special that had been in your family
for many years,
and the gift is very valuable.
How would you feel?
Actually, all of us,
everyone listening to this program
have received such an inheritance.
It's something that's been passed down
from generation to generation for thousands of years.
What is it?
It's God's Word, the Bible.
Through this precious gift,
we feel Jehovah's love in what ways?
Let's consider three.
We feel it when we learn how Jehovah has preserved his Word
for thousands of years so that we'd have it today.
We feel it in the message it conveys
from our loving Heavenly Father.
And we feel it when we see how our lives are improved
when we apply its teachings.
Let's talk about the first.
Jehovah's love is felt in the way that he preserved his Word.
The Bible was written so long ago on perishable materials
and yet we have it today.
We have it on our phones and tablets
and we have printed copies.
Consider what a miracle it is
that Jehovah had the Bible written down,
hand copied for centuries,
and yet it was accurately preserved until our day.
How was the Bible written?
In a miraculous way.
2 Timothy chapter 3 and verse 16 clearly states,
all scripture is inspired of God and beneficial.
Yes, Jehovah used his Holy Spirit to convey his thoughts
to the minds and hearts of faithful men.
Some 40 writers were used.
1600 years passed until the Bible was completed
in about the year 98 CE.
That's more than 1,900 years ago.
So how is it that we have the Bible today?
It had to be hand copied.
Through the centuries, scribes made copies of the text.
For example, the Maserites,
a group of meticulous Jewish scholars and copyists
literally counted the number of words
and even the number of letters.
Why?
To make sure that they copied the text accurately,
they wanted no errors to be introduced.
Thankfully, many ancient Bible manuscripts
have survived until today,
perhaps some 6,000 manuscripts of the Hebrew scriptures
and some 5,000 of the Christian Greek scriptures.
By the 15th century,
the Bible had been hand copied for hundreds of years,
but now that was about to change.
Let me show you what happened using a few examples
from our Bible collection in Warwick, New York.
This is what's often called a Paris Bible.
It was completed in France during the latter part
of the 13th century,
that is somewhere between the years 1250 and 1300.
It's a complete Bible copied by hand.
Look at how beautiful it is.
Imagine the work involved,
a scribe sitting at a table,
day after day carefully copying
so that someone could have a Bible like this.
Of course, few people would ever have been able to own
a precious hand copied Bible like this one.
But Jehovah had something better in mind.
So in the 15th century,
a man named Johannes Gutenberg came up
with an amazing idea.
In about the year 1455,
Gutenberg produced the first printed Bible.
He printed only about 180 copies.
That doesn't sound like a lot today, does it?
But remember,
up until that time,
every Bible had been hand copied.
So this was something truly amazing.
Here's an original page
from one of those 180 Bibles printed by Gutenberg.
It's beautiful, isn't it?
But this was just the beginning.
In time, Gutenberg's invention
would allow for thousands of copies of the Bible
to be printed in a relatively short period of time.
In the years that followed,
printing presses gradually were set up
in various cities in Europe.
What were they able to produce?
In 1475,
Bernard Rieshel produced this Bible
in Basel, Switzerland.
Look at the size of it
and look at the beautiful printing.
It's amazing what those early printers were able to produce.
Although the Bible was now being printed,
there was still a problem.
What was it?
Few people would ever have been able to afford a Bible like this.
Even though it was printed,
it was still very expensive.
This Bible was probably produced for a church,
or for someone who was very wealthy.
But less than 20 years later,
there was another exciting development.
This is the Biblia Integra,
often called the Poor Man's Bible.
It was printed in Switzerland in the year 1491.
What do you notice about it?
It's very small.
It's thought to be the first small-sized printed Bible.
The man who produced this Bible had a new idea.
He produced this Bible to appeal to common churchgoers.
It wasn't a Bible for a library or a church.
It was for personal use,
something that a person could own
and carry with him and read at any time.
Why was this development so important?
Because in the next few decades,
the Bible would be translated
from the original languages
and printed in the vernacular
or common languages of people across Europe.
For the first time,
it would be possible for people
to have a personal copy of the Bible in their own language.
These significant developments in Bible production
give us reason to believe that our loving father, Jehovah, was involved.
He not only had preserved the Bible,
but now he was ensuring that his gift
would be made available to all people.
Now, let's return to the studio.
Of course, God's enemies did not want people
to have Jehovah's precious gift.
Thus, it's not surprising that many people have actively worked
to prevent others from having the Bible.
One scholar, Albert Barnes, described it this way.
No book has excited so much opposition as this.
But it has survived every attack
which power, talent, and eloquence have ever made on it.
No army ever survived so many battles as the Bible.
Humans alone could never have preserved the Bible
in the face of such strong opposition.
It's a miracle that we have it today.
Clearly, we feel the love of Jehovah
when we see how he's preserved the Bible
and made this precious gift available to all.
The Bible's message is a second way
that we feel Jehovah's love.
The Bible teaches us things that we cannot learn anywhere else.
True, without the Bible, we could understand
that there is a creator,
and we could learn about his qualities
from the things he's made.
But the Bible teaches us so much more.
In it, Jehovah tells us his own personal name,
the purpose of life, and what the future holds.
These are things that we'd expect a loving father
to share with his beloved children.
And what's more, Jehovah invites us
to have a close relationship with him.
What a tender and loving father.
The practical guidance for life
that the Bible contains is a third way
that we feel Jehovah's love.
It's a book from the creator
that instructs us how to live a happy
and satisfying life.
It's like our owner's manual
from the creator himself
and how much we need it.
Jesus saw how much people needed that guidance.
Matthew 9.36 says,
On seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them
because they were skinned and thrown
about like sheep without a shepherd.
That's true today also.
People are so confused and lost.
They don't know what to do.
They're often guided simply by their own thinking
and desires.
As a result, people end up in awful situations.
We need reliable guidance
to show us what's right and what's wrong
and to help us find the way to happiness.
And Jehovah has provided all of that
in his precious gift, the Bible.
Romans 15 verse 4 says,
For all the things that were written beforehand
were written for our instruction
so that through our endurance
and through the comfort from the scriptures,
we might have hope.
Even as our circumstances change,
the Bible continues to be our manual for life.
Whether young or old,
single or married,
the guidance and God's word always applies.
It always works.
As we reflect on all the ways
that the Bible is a unique gift,
what do we see or feel?
We feel the tremendous love
that Jehovah has for us
in giving us this gift.
He's made sure that all the information we need
is inside it,
and he helps us to apply it in our life.
With what result?
2 Timothy chapter 3 and verse 16 and 17 says,
All scripture is inspired of God
and beneficial for teaching,
for reproving,
for setting things straight,
for disciplining in righteousness,
so that the man of God may be fully competent,
completely equipped for every good work.
What have we learned in this brief discussion?
Everything about the Bible reflects Jehovah's love.
The miraculous way he preserved it.
It's message from a loving Father
and its practical guidance on how to live.
Inheriting a precious gift
does not guarantee that we will appreciate it.
Likewise, simply having a Bible
does not mean that we'll benefit from it.
To benefit, we need to read His Word,
the manual for life every day.
As we read and study the Bible,
we feel the great love of its author,
our wonderful God, Jehovah.
And the more we feel His love,
the more we're moved to do what He wants us to do.
That includes helping others to receive and benefit
from this precious gift.
In this way, we can help as many as possible
to experience, yes,
to really feel the love of God through the Bible.
In ancient times, Bible writers worked hard
to write down God's Word.
But what techniques and materials did they use?
Let's explore some of those methods.
God inspired some 40 men to write the Bible.
But have you ever wondered,
what did they write it on?
After all, the oldest portions of the Bible
were written more than 1,000 years
before the invention of what we know today as paper.
The earliest Bible manuscripts were written
on a material called papyrus.
Papyrus is a plant that grows in shallow water
with stalks that can reach almost 4.6 meters
or about 15 feet high.
Over 4,000 years ago,
the Egyptians invented ways to turn papyrus
into a smooth, strong writing material similar to paper.
Even with modern tools,
you can see it was a lot of work.
Thin slices of the plant's core
had to be soaked and flattened,
arranged in layers,
and then beaten and pressed
to bind the layers together.
When the sheets were dry,
they were polished with a piece of ivory,
a smooth shell, or even a stone.
The result was a relatively smooth surface for writing.
To make a scroll,
individual sheets of papyrus were pasted together along the edges,
to make a roll that might be more than 6 meters
or about 20 feet in length.
But around the second century CE,
copyists began favoring a new technology
that made papyrus documents much easier to use.
The codex.
With a codex,
the papyrus pages were folded,
sewn, and bound together
to form something similar to a modern book.
Think of all the hours required
to produce these materials to write on.
But without modern pens and pencils,
what did ancient people use to write with?
The pens they used were often made
from pieces of hard read like this.
Carefully cut to produce a pointed slit.
In Bible Times,
one common type of ink that would be used
with these read pens was made
by combining blacksoot
with a rubbery gum
that helped it stick to the page.
Then water was added to the mixture.
Whether in the form of a scroll or a codex,
the problem with papyrus
was that it decomposed easily.
Amazingly,
there are many fragments of Bible manuscripts
on papyrus that have survived down to our day.
What you see here are reproductions of fragments
that are more than 2,000 years old.
In time,
Bible manuscripts began to be copied
onto more durable materials.
By about the 4th century,
the most common of those was parchment.
It was normally made from the hides of sheep,
calves or goats.
The process begins by soaking the hide and water in line,
then removing the hair and excess flesh.
After that,
the skin is stretched on a frame
and scraped with a knife
to remove any residues like fat.
The next step is to dry the skin
under increased tension,
which causes it to become stiff and flat.
Finally,
it's dusted with chalk
and sanded smooth with pumice
to create an even writing surface.
As you can see,
making even one sheet of parchment
requires a tremendous amount of work.
But today,
there are many Bible manuscripts
that were written on parchment,
such as these two original manuscripts here.
Another famous manuscript
is the Codex Amiatinus
located in Italy,
which is over 1,300 years old.
In fact,
it's the oldest,
complete Latin Bible
bound in a single volume ever found.
Some historians feel
that it required the hides
of over 400 animals to produce.
This replica is big,
but the original is even larger.
It weighs 34 kilograms
or about 75 pounds.
Think of all of the work
that went into producing
just that one Bible.
Well, all of these materials
are perishable
and deteriorate with time.
But to preserve his word,
Jehovah God sought to it
that the Bible was
meticulously copied
and recopied over the centuries,
so that today,
we have not just a few,
but thousands of manuscripts
of various parts of the Bible.
So the next time you look
up a Bible verse
by tapping on a link,
think about what it took
to put those words in writing,
and how amazing it is
that Jehovah's Word
recorded using these ancient,
fragile materials,
is still with us today.
We're grateful
to the countless God-fearing men
who carefully wrote down
and copied the Bible.
Their hard work made it possible
for us to have it today,
thus fulfilling the words
of the prophet Isaiah,
the Word of our God,
endures forever.
Our great God, Jehovah,
has used people
from all walks of life
to preserve his message
and holy name.
One such person
was Benjamin Boothroyd,
the son of a humble shoemaker,
who became a minister
and a printer.
What caused this ordinary man
to become a self-taught scholar
and Bible translator?
Let's find out.
We sincerely congratulate
Dr. B, on having completed a task
that was perhaps never before
accomplished by a single individual.
Namely, a corrected Hebrew text
of the Old Testament
and a revised English version
of the whole Bible.
Benjamin Boothroyd was born
in 1768 to a humble shoemaker.
He lived his whole life
in Yorkshire, England.
Boothroyd wasn't wealthy
or prominent,
yet he accomplished something remarkable
in the field of Bible translation.
As a young man,
Boothroyd and his friends
would attend church
and then go to a local ale house,
not dissimilar to this one.
It was on one of these occasions
that Boothroyd experienced something
that changed his life.
The conversation was unusually
profane and simple in which
I joined and was perhaps
worse than any of my companions.
With a suddenness of almost a flash
of lightning,
my mind was struck with horror
under a sense of my sin and guilt
that I was a suitable victim
for the miseries of hell.
Without saying a word,
Boothroyd left the ale house
and his companions behind.
As he walked home,
he got down on his knees
and begged God to have mercy on him.
It was a pivotal moment.
He resolved to dedicate
the rest of his life to God.
We're here at the National Library of Wales
to reveal the next chapter
of Boothroyd's story.
In 1801,
Boothroyd married Sarah Hurst
who shared his devotion and faith.
To supplement their income,
a couple ran a small bookshop
and printery.
It was there
Boothroyd acquired these books.
Lectures on the sacred poetry
of the Hebrews.
Those lectures on Hebrew
poetry fell into my hands.
I read it with peculiar pleasure.
Boothroyd fell in love
with the Hebrew language.
He decided to learn it.
But how?
Boothroyd noticed
that some of the Psalms
were split into standards
using different Hebrew letters.
The names of the letters
came from the 119th Psalm.
And I began to read
the early part of the Pentateuch.
He painstakingly taught himself
Hebrew letters,
then words,
then grammar,
until he could read the Bible
in Hebrew.
On comparing the latest
Hebrew printed texts,
such as these
by Benjamin Kenikot
with older available manuscripts,
Boothroyd discovered
something troubling.
It had many errors.
This led him
to a monumental decision.
Boothroyd began a project
to compile and publish
a more accurate Hebrew text
of the Old Testament.
While he did the majority
of the work,
he wasn't alone.
My wife learned the names
of the Hebrew letters,
and we examined the sheets,
not by uttering words,
but by pronouncing
by letter.
Sarah helped her husband
proofread the work
to confirm the accuracy.
After years of meticulous work,
they completed Boothroyd's
Biblia Hebraica
in two volumes
in 1816.
Many would consider such
an accomplishment
to be the achievement
of a lifetime.
But Boothroyd
was about to begin
another major undertaking.
Boothroyd felt it was his duty
to produce a revised Bible
in plain English,
a Bible that anyone
could understand.
So, with the knowledge,
materials, and means
available to him,
he went back to work.
We're now at the University
in Lampeter
to find out what Boothroyd accomplished.
Just two years later,
in 1818,
he published the first volume
of a new family Bible.
The second volume was completed
in 1821,
and by 1824,
the entire English translation
was released.
Once again,
he hadn't accomplished this
on his own.
Through the whole of this important
and laborious work,
Mrs. Boothroyd was my
chief support and assistant
and to her,
the public are as much
indebted as myself.
A new family Bible
was appreciated
by scholars and faithful
Bible readers alike.
One thing in particular
made Boothroyd's Bible
especially significant.
Boothroyd followed this rule
while translating.
I have adopted Chahova
instead of Lord,
and Chahova God
is certainly more proper
and just to the original
than Lord God.
This was the first
English Bible ever published
to consistently use Chahova
in the Old Testament.
Boothroyd also included
it several times
in the New Testament.
The University of Glasgow
awarded Boothroyd a degree
in recognition of this outstanding
piece of scholarship.
His new family Bible was later
used as the basis
for translating the Bible
into languages
of the South Pacific,
such as Tahisha.
As a result,
these two used Chahova's name
extensively.
Using what was available to him,
Boothroyd peered
into the Scriptures,
seeking to know their meaning,
and then worked to share
that knowledge with others.
In his dedication
to his new family Bible,
he wrote,
I have no interest to serve
but that of truth.
This man
of lowly origins
achieved something truly rare.
His works gave people knowledge
of God's word,
God's will,
and God's name.
How encouraging it was
to see Boothroyd's efforts
to help others understand God's word
and to restore God's name
to the English Bible.
Through the Bible,
Chahova also expresses his love
for another group,
Orphans.
He wants these dear ones
to feel especially cared for.
Let's see how
Nazar Kamar,
a deaf man who was also
an orphan,
came to feel Chahova's love.
When I was a child,
I attended a boarding school.
All of my basic needs
were taken care of.
But on the weekends,
I noticed that the other kids
had parents that would take them home.
No one ever came to take me home.
They seemed so happy.
I was alone.
My name is Nazar Kamar.
I was born in Kiev, Ukraine.
And seven days after I was born,
when I was still just a baby,
my parents abandoned me.
The school principal
and teachers took turns caring for me.
But I saw the other parents
and how much they loved their children.
I really wanted to have my own parents.
I waited for them to come.
But they never did.
It was very painful.
So I decided I needed a goal to focus on.
I hoped my parents were looking for me.
And I thought playing sports
might help them find me.
They might see me
and recognize that I am their son.
I concentrated on getting good
enough to play professionally.
I learned to play very well.
But my hope always was
that when I traveled to different places,
my parents might be sitting in the stands.
And they would see me and say,
this is our son.
We found you.
I began playing in a national league.
And the team provided me a small room to live in
and began to pay me a salary.
It was not much.
And not enough to live on.
So I also got a job working at a factory.
While working there, I met Sidge.
He was one of Joe's witnesses.
He would show me scriptures from the Bible,
like Revelation 21, 3 and 4.
About a future paradise
with wonderful conditions
where there would be no more suffering
or pain.
I wanted a life like that.
But I didn't see those conditions around me.
My life was very hard.
So these promises were difficult to believe.
Sidge also showed me God's name in the Bible
at Exodus 15-3.
And he explained to me the meaning of God's name, Jehovah.
That he can become whatever he chooses to become.
When I connected that name
with his promise at Revelation 21, 3 and 4,
it was then that I started to believe it.
At my first meeting,
I was amazed by what I saw.
The hearing and the deaf were communicating together.
They had unity,
and they cared for each other.
I felt comfortable there.
At one of the meetings,
I saw the verse at Psalm 68-5,
which refers to Jehovah God
as the Father of the Fatherless.
I was touched.
He knows exactly how hard it is to be an orphan.
He fully understands me.
It gave me goose bumps.
And I felt an inner peace and comfort.
When my basketball team and the deaf community
learned that I was studying the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses,
they were very upset with me.
They told me I would lose their support.
I would lose my salary and housing.
I was at a crossroads.
Since I'm an orphan,
where would I live?
This was a very difficult time.
I noticed that I didn't feel the same unity
or connection with my team,
as I did with Jehovah's Witnesses.
So, I decided to continue to study the Bible.
I gave up their support.
And God baptized.
Jehovah has blessed me.
I am no longer alone.
I have my own family now.
My wife, yet the Kia.
We love and cherish each other so much.
He has also given me brothers and sisters
who care about me.
They are my spiritual family.
My life is no longer full of pain.
Today, I still search for my parents
and wait for them.
Because when I find them,
I want to help them
by telling them about God's name.
Now, I no longer consider myself an orphan,
because I have a father.
My father in heaven,
whose name is Jehovah.
When we search for love and acceptance
in the congregation,
we'll find that we belong to a caring family.
Lovers of truth have sacrificed
more than time and energy.
Many of sacrifice their very lives
so that we can have God's word
in a language we understand.
Let's visit the Belgium Bethel Bible Museum
to learn who took such a risk and why.
Jehovah gave us the Bible
so that we could know Him
and love Him.
He wants us to become His friends.
Jehovah made sure that the Bible
would be available
no matter where people live
or what language they speak.
The Bible Museum,
located at the branch office
of Jehovah's Witnesses in Brussels, Belgium,
with the theme,
the Bible and the low countries,
tells the fascinating story
of Bible translation and production
in the coastal region
of Northwestern Europe.
In this museum,
you will learn of honest hearted people
who came to love the Bible
and wanted to make it available to others.
Throughout the Middle Ages,
the Roman Catholic Church
feared the spread of Bibles
in vernacular languages.
Understanding the Bible
would have exposed the
unchristian behavior of the Church.
This led to cruel persecution
of Bible translators.
What role did the region
of the low countries play
in this overheated religious atmosphere?
By the 16th century,
the city of Antwerp, Belgium,
had become the leading
commercial center of Western Europe.
Antwerp's relatively tolerant
religious and political climate
made it an ideal hub
for translating and printing Bibles
in common everyday languages.
About 270 printers,
publishers and booksellers
were located in this cosmopolitan city.
In addition,
the significant seaport
was perfect for smuggling Bibles
to neighboring countries.
One of the many printers
working in Antwerp
was Jakub van Lee's belt.
In 1526,
he courageously published
the first complete Bible in Dutch.
This was one of the first Bibles
printed in a single volume.
Van Lee's belt eventually printed
a total of 19 Bible editions.
Despite the comparatively safe working conditions
in Antwerp, Bible publishers
were not fully protected from the church.
Van Lee's belt was condemned to death
for including marginal notes
in his final edition of the Dutch Bible.
Notes which the Catholic Church
found offensive to their dogma.
He was one of several
Antwerp Bible printers
executed for their work.
A translator
who also published his work in Antwerp
was the French scholar
Jacques Lafevre de Tape.
He dedicated himself
to restoring the original meaning
of ancient writings
and studied closely
the Latin Volgate Bible.
He strongly believed
in the right
of every Christian
to read and learn the Bible personally.
Therefore,
the Fevre devoted all his energy
to translating the Bible into French.
It was the first
complete Bible to be printed
in this language.
He was sure
the Gospels would be, as he said,
purely proclaimed
throughout the world
so that people may no longer be
led astray by alien doctrines of men.
Although his Bible translation
initially was approved
by the Holy Roman Emperor
Charles V. In 1546,
the Fevre's second edition
was placed on the
Roman Catholic Church's
index of forbidden books.
Another courageous man,
one who translated the scriptures
into English, was a clergyman
and a scholar of Greek
and Latin.
The name of this man was
William Tindale.
He was passionate about God's word.
Tindale wrote,
we must desire God
to make us understand
and feel
wherefor the scripture was given.
That we may apply the medicine
of the scripture.
For translating the new testament
into English, he was chased
and hunted by church and state.
He sought refuge in various cities
including the city of Antwerp.
Here,
he published a revised version
of the new testament
and his translation
of the Pentateuch
where he used Jehovah's name
for the first time
in an English translation.
Tindale also was executed
for his translation work.
Publishing Bibles
in Spain was a very
dangerous undertaking.
For this reason,
in 1543, the translator
Francisco Danthenus
also printed in Antwerp.
It was the first
Spanish version to be translated
directly from the original
Greek text.
He wrote,
it seemed to me that I had
but one task.
To commit to the press,
the work I had taken
pains to produce.
And then commended to God,
the father of the whole business
for whose cause it had been made.
So arrested for his work.
Yet, some copies of his
new testament made it to Spain.
It had a strong influence
on other Spanish translations
such as the widely
known Reina Valera Bible.
The first edition of which
was also printed in the low countries.
There are many more
intriguing gems for you
to discover in this museum.
Like the Antwerp Polyglot,
which contains Bible text
of five languages.
And the secretly produced
Dutch Jehovah Bible.
All printed
in the low countries.
All these men displayed
love for God's word.
And Jehovah blessed their efforts
because the work that they did
set in motion a series of events
that have resulted in God's word
being available today
in thousands of languages.
The Bible Museum
in Belgium is one
of our many museums
around the world.
Each highlighting unique
aspects of the fascinating history
of God's word.
These exhibitions deep
in our appreciation for the Bible.
And the truthfulness
of 1 Peter 125
where it says,
the saying of Jehovah
and doers forever.
The Belgium Branch Bible Museum
of the many Bible museums
at our branch offices around the world.
If you're able,
we hope you too will visit
one of the Bible museums
at a branch office close to you.
There you'll learn more
about the many honest-hearted people
who've endured persecution
to publish God's word
the Bible.
Welcoming new ones
into the congregations brings us great joy.
But how can we help them
be firmly grounded
in the truth?
Let's listen to brother David Schaefer
explain how
in the following morning worship.
So what does it
take to help someone
become firmly
grounded in the truth?
Let's focus on
three things.
Cooperating
with divine direction.
Loving the truth
and loving people
who love the truth.
Let's go back to the year 50 CE
and see what we can learn
from Paul's ministry
in Macedonia.
Now Paul began his second
missionary tour around 49 CE.
In Listera,
he and Silas found Timothy
who Paul met on his first visit.
But now Timothy
is ready to accompany them
on their journey.
The map indicates no stops
between Antioch
and Troas.
Just a swoop.
What does it represent?
Obedience
to divine direction.
Acts 16-8-10
tells us
the map indicates no stops
between Antioch
and Troas.
Just a swoop.
What does it represent?
16-8-10 tells us
that they tried to preach
in Asia but were forbidden
by Holy Spirit.
Then they tried to preach
in Bethinia,
but again Jesus used the Holy Spirit
to block them.
So they turned west
and went all the way to Troas
on the coast.
This is where they met up with Luke.
And it's in Troas
that they received divine direction
and they wasted no time.
They stepped onto a ship
and they sailed over
to Macedonia.
It's now spring
or early summer, 50 CE.
Within a year,
Paul formed congregations
in Philippi,
Thessalonica,
and Berea,
cities of Macedonia.
But how did he do it?
It's turned to Acts chapter 17
for the truth.
Shined through Acts chapter 17.
I begin in verse 1.
They now traveled through Amphilis
and Apollonia
and came to Thessalonica,
where there was a synagogue
of the Jews.
So according to Paul's custom,
he went inside to them
and for three Sabbaths,
he reasoned with them
from the Scriptures,
explaining and proving
and to rise from the dead.
Today's text.
Well, here we see Paul
in the synagogue,
in Thessalonica.
He has their attention.
Why?
He's using God's inspired word.
Paul loves these truths.
You can see it in his eyes.
And he's forming an attachment
for these new disciples.
Is Jason
in this picture?
And as all those believers
came from Thessalonica,
but there's a problem.
This was not Paul's synagogue,
and the Jews were getting jealous.
At Acts chapter 17 and verse 5,
they began persecuting the new believers.
Persecution.
Paul had been opposed
in Philippi,
and now here in Thessalonica
as he would be in Berea
as well.
In short order,
he would be whisked away
from Macedonia altogether.
So to stabilize those new congregations,
Paul left Luke
in Philippi,
Silas, in Berea,
and Timothy,
in Thessalonica.
With trained representatives
in each new congregation,
could Paul now forget
about Macedonia?
Well, turn with me please
in chapter 2 and verse 17.
This is where we see
Paul's love
for the brothers.
When Timothy came to Paul
and Corinth and reported on the brothers in Thessalonica,
it moved Paul to right.
What was very likely
his first inspired letter.
And in this letter,
he reveals where his heart was,
first Thessalonians 2, 17.
When we were
separated,
that's a powerful word.
Associated with
parents bereaved
of their children,
indicating the strong bond
Paul felt for his spiritual family.
When we were
separated from you, brothers,
for just a short time,
in person,
not in our hearts.
Yes, Paul's heart
was still with the congregation
in Thessalonica.
Every effort to see you in person
for this reason,
we wanted to come to you.
Yes, I, Paul, tried,
not just once, but twice.
But yet,
Satan cut across
our path.
Well, by this point,
Paul had tried to go back twice,
but his efforts were hindered.
Would he mistake that
as divine
indication that his work
in Thessalonica was finished?
No.
Paul knew the difference
between divine direction
and satanic opposition.
And he did not give up.
Impaled by Jehovah's Spirit,
Paul wrote this letter.
And in his love
for the congregation,
and with his love for the truth,
he reminds the Thessalonians of their hope.
In verse 19, he mentions Christ's presence.
In this one brief letter,
he talks about Christ's presence more
than he would in all 13
of his other inspired
letters combined.
Why?
Because these
persecuted Christians in Thessalonica
needed to be reminded of their hope.
They needed to wear it like a helmet
and let it guard their thinking.
And the encouragement worked.
So,
Satan used
a different tactic.
Speculators tried to twist Paul's word.
Why did he mention Christ's presence so much?
Might this prove that the presence has already begun?
Possibly there was even a letter wrongly attributed
to Paul that was being interpreted to mean
that the day of Jehovah had arrived.
Well, what could Paul do about this?
He wrote his second
inspired letter.
In it, he admonished the brothers
not to be quickly shaken from their reason
because Jehovah's Day would not come.
Unless
the apostasy comes first.
The
apostasy.
Those words
completely harmonized
with Jesus' illustration about the wheat
and the weeds.
A prophecy recorded in Matthew's Gospel,
which had been in circulation
for nearly 10 years
when Paul
was in Thessalonians.
It's also in second
Thessalonians that we learn
that this apostasy would eventually
set in
because people did not
accept
the love
of the truth.
Meanwhile, though, Paul and the other apostles
would act as a restraint
against apostasy by fostering love
for the truth.
Yes, by Paul's example
he was stating
on the scriptures
reasoning
from them
explaining them
and proving
with references he equipped the brothers
to withstand the opposition
they would face.
As it turns out, Paul did return
to Macedonia
two more times
and what did he find?
Strong congregations
and the truth
unselfish
in their generosity
giving even beyond their actual ability
their example
inspires Christians
to this very day.
So what does it take
to help others
become well-grounded
in the truth?
Persistence
in obeying divine direction
helping others
and loving
those who love
the truth.
Even when we're separated
by circumstances
remaining attached
at heart, may we continue
to follow this example
of genuine love
as we carry out our sacred
service today.
Given the world's
self-centered attitude,
we consider belonging
to God.
Speaking of gifts,
we have a surprise for you.
A preview of what
will experience
at our 2025 Pure Worship
Regional Convention.
Enjoy.
People have a need to worship
something.
A higher power.
Themselves.
Other people.
Money.
But how should we fill this need?
True worshipists
must worship with spirit
and truth.
The 2025 Convention
of Jehovah's Witnesses
continues the new video series
the Good News
according to Jesus.
Jesus alone is qualified
to teach us how to worship God.
The benefits are personal,
immediate, and everlasting.
We're certain you'll thoroughly
have three days of learning
what it means to give
pure worship to Jehovah.
In this month's program,
we've seen how Jehovah's
love is expressed
through his gift of the Bible.
We feel his love
when we consider how he preserved
his word from ancient times
until our modern day.
How he used humble people
to restore his name
and how its message
to his life.
This month's music video
highlights that his word
is filled with love.
What's filled with love
Jehovah's love
Reminds me
not to worry
how the trial will never
last.
Gives me hope for the future
helps me learn from the past.
Your promise draws me
close to you
as you draw close to me
and once again,
I'm thankful
that I can see
like the dew there
in the morning
like the wolf is from the sun
like the moon
light on
what is there for everyone
like a pillow
is for comfort
so your words can
comfortably
as I meditate on this
it's easy just to see
it's filled with love
Jehovah's love
I'm stronger in
much you
like a letter from
I'm reading every day
as I turn the precious pages
so many thoughts
to come my way
and every day
that passes
gives me reason to be
sure
with the things that I
am
in the morning
like the warmth
is from the sun
like the moon light on
is there for everyone
like a pillow
is for comfort
so your words can
comfortably
as I meditate
it's easy just to see
it's filled with love
Jehovah's love
Our postcard this month
to the beautiful country
of Paraguay
Paraguay is a landlocked country
in the heart of South America
with a population of about 7
million
the Paraguay river runs from north
to south dividing the country
the east is characterized
by rolling hills
fertile fields
some of which have red
soil and thick forests
in contrast
to the region
has a sparse population
coarse grass
scrub forest
vast swamps
and diverse colorful
tropical birds
Paraguay has two
official languages
Spanish and Guani
and when the two languages
mix you get
Jopara
which is frequently used today
Paraguay's theocratic history
has been dragged
randomly sent to his home
from world headquarters
This moved him to order studies
in the scriptures
In 1906
he and his brother-in-law
baptized each other
becoming the first
in Paraguay to accept Bible truth
In 1924
Juan Munois
a faithful missionary
from Spain
arrived to spread the kingdom message
including Paraguay.
Then in 1934, brothers Martonfi,
Coros, and Reibach entered the country
despite the ongoing Chaco War.
Their efforts paid off when the first congregation
was formed five years later.
Decades of political instability resulted in a decree
revoking the organization's legal status
in 1979.
As a result, the brothers had to conduct meetings
in small groups at private homes or in isolated areas.
Fortunately, 12 years later in 1991,
the organization was legally recognized
after the fall of the military regime.
Did the publishers dwindle during those years?
Sadly, the number of publishers doubled in size.
Today, there are over 11,000 publishers
who conduct about 10,000 Bible studies
and attend 183 congregations.
In the western part of the country,
we find the Philadelphia Espanol and Loma Plata Guarani congregations.
The 95 publishers of these two congregations
conduct an average of 155 Bible studies
and preach in Spanish, Guarani,
Low German, and Niva Clay.
The Philadelphia Espanol and Loma Plata Guarani congregations
send their love.
We love you all very much.
From the world headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses,
this is J.W. Broadcasting.